Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Richard Lops, and
today I'm here with a fellow YouTuber Keegan Tatum.
He has a very interesting channel and TikTok page
or TikTok account on the psychology of politics, and
today we're going to talk about that, and we're
going to bash conservatives, I guess, a lot.
So once or twice, once or twice.
Yeah, so Keegan, welcome to the show. I mean,
I really love your videos, so thank you so
much for taking
the
time.
Well, thanks a lot for having me, Ricardo. I'm
very excited to be on. And uh for anyone
that wants to check me out, you know, you
can just go Keegan Tatum, the name's right here,
right? Uh, ON YouTube, Instagram, TikTok. TikTok is the
best because they actually get this, pay us for
our views. Anyway, so yeah, if you're into the
psychology of politics, and uh my focus is what
are the differences between people on the right and
people on the left? What makes progressives and conservatives
different, motivation is what really interests me.
Yeah, I'm going to leave all the links to
TikTok and everything in the description, and I, and
I I'm also going to send you a link
later to add you as a collaborator on YouTube
if that's OK, so people will get access to
all of your content. So I mean, but before
we get into the actual juicy stuff here about
the differences between right wingers and left wingers, conservatives
and progressives and so on. What is the psychology
of politics? I mean, what is it that we
can learn through psychology about politics and how basically
people's political minds operate that perhaps we can't really
do through, for example, political science, philosophy, and so
on.
That's a great and very big question. So, I
think it's just looking at things from a different
angle. So it's looking at like, What goes up
here and turns into action because with political science,
we're looking so much at either the ideas themselves
or we're looking at behavior such as voting, but
we're not looking at why, you know, I mean,
I guess to a certain extent you might be
looking at, OK, well, there's bad income inequality in
this region, so they typically stratify to the far
right and to the populist left, but I think
it gives you a deeper understanding. As to why
people make the decisions that they make, and I
think that if you're somebody who is on the
left, as, as one or two of the followers
and people on screen might be, it's really hard
to understand. Why is it that people don't act
rationally? Why don't people see all the injustices, the
inequality, the exploitation under capitalism, if I do, if
I, if I'm allowed to say that, um, and
why don't they act rationally? Why are they blaming
immigrants, hating on trans people, being anti-feminists, like, why?
Why? And I think that the psychology of politics.
At least it's it's probably the best attempt we
have to answer that kind of stuff.
So what makes, I, I mean, actually, I was
going to ask you what makes someone conservative, but
I'm going to expand the question and actually ask
you from a psychological perspective, er. I mean, how
do you define or what characterizes someone who tends
to identify as liberal versus someone who identifies as
conservative, and do you make a distinction between liberal
and left wing because I mean, in the US,
particularly, people, I see that people tend to conflate
a lot liberal with left wing, which is something
that we do not do at all here in
Europe. Actually here in Portugal, for example, liberal, the
liberals are very much right wing. So how do
you approach that?
That's a, that's a great question. We should define
our terms up front. So in my view, Politics
is about one thing, and that's power. When you
get right down to it, people on the right
stand for hierarchy and inequality in terms of power.
So I'll just use the American example that means
white supremacy. It means male supremacy. It means the.
DOGMA of the Christian church over everyone else and
most importantly it means the supremacy of the business
owner over the worker. You take a look at
any policy and if you break it down into
power, what you ultimately come to is people on
the right are about concentration of power and people
on the left are about an egalitarian distribution of
power. So that means expanding voting rights. I'm looking
in a historical lens, right? That means expanding workers'
rights, that means women are equal. Come on, what
are we doing here, you know, uh, that immigrants
are people. Maybe we should treat them as such.
Everyone should have healthcare. If you, if you can
imagine living in a country like that, I can't
literally, literally can't imagine living in a country like
that. But, um, well, I
mean, here in Europe we tend to have universal
healthcare, you know, that's,
that's what I'm, that's, that's what I'm alluding to.
I, I, I know, I know. Trust me, I,
one of the things, if it weren't for the
psychology of politics, my thing was inequality and comparative
politics, so. I have a little bit of that,
and a little bit of that in my brain.
So, um, and then the left-right spectrum, you know,
you're talking about like the distinction, there's also a
distinction between conservatives and fascists. In America, it's starting
to blend. A lot of people, most people who
identify as conservative in the United States are also
fascists, but if you look at politics through a
spectrum rather than buckets, I think it's very helpful
and, and throughout this whole conversation. That's how I
want everyone to think about everything that I say,
where it's like, if you wanna know, well, well,
what's the difference between a centrist and a progressive?
Well, if I say something about a conservative, like
conservatives are More intolerant of uncertainty and ambiguity, right?
So they're the, they're the most intolerant. People on
the left are the most tolerant, so people in
the center are in the center, right? And so,
psychologically speaking, do I make a distinction between liberals
and leftists? This is very difficult to actually answer,
and the reason is because unlike the right, where
conservatives and right-wing authoritarians, AKA fascists, that's the most
common form of right-wing authoritarianism. Those are pretty equal
groups in terms of their numbers, at least here
in the United States, which is where a ton
of the studies have been done. Whereas the number
of, of like liberal, center left, progressive type people
are Far more numerous than leftists, and that's really
true everywhere if you look at the data, you
know, the number of anarchists and like truly democratic
socialists are far outweighed by the center left. So
the distinctions between liberals and leftists are not as
well studied because it's hard to get enough of
a sample size, particularly here in the United States.
I would say that generally speaking, People who have
a right-wing authoritarian psychology or personality, depending on what
you, what you want to label it, there are
distinct characteristics that differentiate them from normie conservatives. Right,
so it's, it's like the relation between a, a
square and a rectangle. All squares are rectangles, but
not all rectangles are squares. Squares have unique properties
that differentiate them, right? So all right-wing authoritarians have
all of the qualities of a conservative, but not
all conservatives have all the qualities of a right-wing
authoritarian. Now, is that true of people on the
left? I don't really see much evidence of that,
other than to say there are slightly different emotional
tendencies, so. When it comes to, you know, emotional
intelligence, I don't think it's that. People that are
far left have unlocked some new level of emotional
intelligence, it's just they have more, right? They have
a, I think people on the left have a
greater sense of urgency than people in the center
and center left, but there, as far as I
can tell, really is nothing that Truly makes people
on the left um different in the way that
right-wing authoritarians are different from normy conservatives.
Right. I mean, do you think that when we
talk about er liberals, conservatives, progressives, centrists, and so
on, that we have to perhaps take into account
the specific uh cultural context that we are talking
about because as I mentioned earlier, for example, here
in Portugal and I think it's more or less
the same across Europe, at least Western Europe with
tend to look at liberals as being right wingers
or center right because they tend to be the
ones who are economically conservative but socially liberal. I
mean they might be, I don't know, in favor
of euthanasia, in favor of trans people, and so
on, in favor of gay rights, but they are
very much hardcore capitalists, and some of them are
even libertarians when it comes. To economics and people
who we consider to be on the actual left
here in Europe are the Social Democrats, the democratic
socialists, the hardcore socialists, the Marxists, communists, and people
like that. So people who are actually economically progressive.
Two things to say on that. So, so often
in my videos, I try to use the word
progressive because in my view, Uh, you know, I
know that more than 25% of my audience is
not based in the United States. So when I
say the word liberal, if you're in Britain, the
Liberal Democrats are, as you say, they are a,
a generous. If we're generous, they're center right on
economics. If we're, you know, realistic, they're pretty far
right in terms of the ideological spectrum. And so
I try to use the word progressive because For
me, the only point of words is to get
the idea in my head over to your head,
and I try to use the words that effectively
communicate that as much as I possibly can. So,
the literature often uses the term liberal as a
catch-all term for people that are left leaning. I
try to use different terms. The other thing I
want to um note is. So, people who are
like Stalinist, like pro-Soviet Union type of, you know,
socialist or communists, they would actually be right-wing authoritarian
for two reasons. First off, psychologically speaking, they do
fit the model of right-wing authoritarianism, which is authoritarian
submission, authoritarian aggression, so it's aggression on behalf of
the perceived enemies of the authority and conventionalism. You
live our way or Um, and that is often
steeped in tradition, because that's what people are used
to, and typically speaking, people on the right can't
stand change, but I would just want to note
that the the like the tanky Soviet Union defenders,
they're actually right-wing and of course if you actually
look at their political views, they really are for
a highly stratified hierarchical authoritarian kind of society where
power is concentrated. It's just not concentrated in the
hands of a business owner, a capitalist business owner.
It is instead concentrated in the power of the
one-party state or the bureaucrat that runs the business.
Effectively similar to the capitalist business owner, where they
have autocratic control over the workers. So, I, that's
why I, I, I hate the definition of left
versus right that is like, oh dude, uh, the
left is for more government intervention in the economy
and the right is for less government intervention in
the economy. It's like, OK, so you're gonna put
Stalin and like Gandhi. Or us on the same
but like that we're the complete opposite, that spectrum
does not make any sense. I'll get off the
soapbox for a sec. I hope I answered the
question.
Yeah, I, I mean, but, but that's a very
interesting take, that's actually one of the takes that
I heard from you that I found the most
interesting. So do you think that there's no Good
scientific evidence or good enough scientific evidence to support
the idea that there's left-wing authoritarianism, or do you
think that all authoritarianism is right wing?
I think all authoritarianism is right wing, and the,
and the reason is, again, if you look at
everything that the right has always stood for, it
has always been for concentration of power, and you
can't have a highly egalitarian society, which is what
the left has always supported. That's also authoritarian, that's
also totalitarian, like, those are what they call contradictions.
So, the and the and what actually unlocked this
was not studying political theory at all. It was
studying the psychology of politics because uh back when
I was at Columbia for grad school, the thing
that I wanted to study for my like, big
literature review, which we were required to do for
that course, um, was to look at left-wing authoritarianism
and I, I read. Everything that there was to
know, everything that had been written, everything that had
been studied, left-wing authoritarianism in political psychology is called
the Loch Ness Monster, because people keep thinking it
exists and finding no evidence of it.
OK, so, but, but just to be fair here,
what do you make of people who are socialist
or even communist or identify as such, and they
point to some of what they consider to be
the mistakes made in the former Soviet Union and
other countries which adopted a form of state socialism,
and they say that. I mean, basically they agree,
for example, with workers' unions, I mean companies run
by workers without any central authority, and they would,
and they say that ultimately we Should even overcome
the state, so we should have a stateless society.
I mean, don't you think that at least the
ones who support those ideas should be labeled as
or considered left wing?
If the outcomes that they support are for decentralizing
power or for democratizing power and democratizing ownership, that's
as far left as you can get, no doubt.
So if you wanna talk about like the strategy
of like, first we have to have a proletariat,
uh, a dictatorship of the proletariat, and then transition,
like, OK, I'm, I'm, I, the way that I
work is show me the evidence that it can
work and I'll agree with you. The problem is
that you can't. Uh, THE small side, you can't
force the kind of like transformative class consciousness requiring
change without a whole lot of legwork like feudalism
was not overthrown overnight and unfortunately we have a
bias because we don't live that long as humans,
um, in other words, we want the change now,
right? And people on the left, one thing that's
really different about people on the left versus like
center left is that sense of urgency. The injustice
is, it's always there, we have to fix it
now, um. However, Um, when it comes to like
the state running socialism, I really don't see much
of a difference from the perspective of a working
person, between having a capitalist business owner be the
dictator of the workplace and having a government bureaucrat
being the dictator in the workplace. You are still
functionally. What word do we want to use? Powerless.
I was gonna use indentured servant, but uh but
that's not quite right, you know, um, you know,
a wage slave. Um, YOU functionally have no power
and the government can say, well, we're a government
of the people, but it's like, Politicians lie, man.
Just because they call it socialism doesn't mean it
actually is socialism. Of course, language does change and
you could argue that there are right-wing authoritarian versions
of socialism like they had it in the Soviet
Empire. Just like there are left-wing versions of socialism,
just like with capitalism, the Nazis were capitalist, uh,
America is capitalist, capitalists, we're far right, so were
the Nazis. Uh, BUT also you have Sweden in
the 60s, 70s. That was a pretty, I mean,
as far as human societies go, that's one of
the most left-wing governments you'll ever get, societies you'll
ever get, and they were also capitalist. So, um,
you can go either way in terms of how
you'd like to define words. I really don't have
a problem with either one, but that's not psychology
stuff.
OK, OK. Yeah, yeah, sure. So, uh, getting into
the psychology itself, what do we know? I, I
mean, do we have any idea about what is
the earliest age at which we can already identify,
uh, conservative or uh progressive traits in children? I
mean, can we, is it possible To tell whether
a particular child already shows conservative or progressive tendencies
in terms of their thinking, or is that something
that we can, we can only do for adults?
That is an interesting question, so. There were a
couple of studies that I've read that show that
children who are brighter, more intelligent at age 10
grow up to be more progressive, and children that
are less intelligent grow up to be more bigoted,
particularly racist. That's at age 10 or 11. However,
that's not exactly like, uh, they. ARE conservative, they
have these traits. I don't know if I really
wanna count that. That's more of an intelligence first
thing, which, by the way, I will say. One
of the things about political psychology that's very interesting
is it works from who you are as a
person to explain your politics, rather than using your
politics to explain who you are as a person.
I just find that interesting. So, there is a
study. Um, IF you want to look it up,
look up Block. That's the, the two lead authors
are B L O C K, Nursery School, Personality
and Political Orientation, two decades later. It's kind of
in the title, right? So, they looked at kids,
they were aged 3 or 4, and they asked
the teachers to give the researchers a description of
their personality, right? So, Here is what I will
quote from that, OK? Quote, preschool children who 20
years later were relatively liberal were characterized as developing
close relationships, that's interesting, interpersonal connection, self-reliant, boy, does
that ever, um, does that ever slap a conservative
ego right there. Energetic, uh, which is probably, uh,
uh, another way of saying extroverted or more personable,
somewhat dominating. Relatively undercontrolled, so self-control, um, and resilient,
so they aren't knocked down easily. Very good. Uh,
PRESCHOOL children subsequently, uh, who are relatively conservative at
age 23, were described as feeling easily victimized, easily
offended, indecisive. So indecisive might be the result of
having parents who were more authoritarian. And so they
aren't used to really having to think through and
make their own decisions. Interesting, uh, fearful, rigid, rigid
is very interesting because conservatives are consistently found to
be more closed-minded, uh, inhibited. And relatively overcontrolled and
vulnerable. That was describing preschool children, 3 or 4
years old, who later grew up to be conservatives
versus people who are more left leaning, and I
find that, I find that very interesting, and you
can see these kinds of tendencies pop up in,
in your personal life when you're dealing with people
that are more conservative or more progressive.
And I mean, what do we know about where
these psychological differences between conservatives and progressives stem from?
Is there any genetic or biological basis to them?
I mean, I, I know that a few years
ago I read some behavioral genetic studies that, I
mean, supposedly pointed to at least some. Heritability, I
can't remember exactly the percentage there, but I, I'm
not sure whether those studies replicate it or not.
Um, I mean, what do we know about that?
Is it more of a genetic slash biological, biological
thing or more of a, uh, developmental slash environmental
thing?
It's a great question. I love answering this one
because it's so easy to fall into the thinking
of like, oh, they're just dumber, there's no hope,
uh, there's nothing we can do. They're gonna keep
making kids and their kids are gonna be dumb
and conservative just like them, right? But What we
have to understand is, is, is, A, your environment
is huge. Your environment is absolutely critical to who
you become as a person. And also, your environment
is critical in bringing out Some of what is
heritable and suppressing some of what you inherit from
your parents. So, for example, You might have a
genetic predisposition for being more fearful and more anxious
about your personal safety. However, if you grow up
in an environment where your parents make you feel
safe and secure and loved, That genetic predisposition for
fear tendencies might not crop up as much as
if, for example, you grew up in a um
a a highly right wing religious household here in
the United States, where they are constantly driving home
that the world is very dangerous and that you
should fear it. So, it's not just nature or
nurture, it's also that nurture can play with nature.
Think of nature as like a rough draft, and
your experience acts as edits over time. That's a
quote from some study, uh, from somebody much more
intelligent than me. Um, NOW, there are studies into,
for example, prejudice or social dominance orientation, so, Here's
how I'll describe social dominance orientation, OK? So, there's
the Trump supporters, they are the right-wing authoritarian followers,
OK. Those are called right-wing authoritarians. Social dominance orientation
is the Trumps, the Putin's, the Netanyahu's of the
world, the cult leaders of the world, just your
average, uh, dickhead boss, business owner, right? These are
people with social dominance orientation where, where Uh, and
a lot of them are sociopathic or narcissistic. There's
a lot of overlap here, where it's like the
point is to have power over people, like, that's
how they really get off, that's what drives their
ego, it's what makes them feel alive, um. So
people with social dominance orientation, um, have been studied,
people with right-wing authoritarianism have been studied, and it's
been estimated that 40 to 60% of their prejudice
is genetic. Or genetic predispositions. So, um, and keep
in mind, Nurture interplays with nature. Right. However, when
it comes to your political views overall, um, I,
I think 40 to 60% is, is probably pretty
reasonable based off of what I've read.
Mhm. And uh I've watched several of your videos
where you talk about brain differences between conservatives and
progressives. You talk about uh structures or brain areas
like the amygdala, the anterior cingulate cortex, the prefrontal
cortex, and I, I mean, to be very honest,
uh since I haven't done lots of interviews on
the um, the subdivisions of the prefrontal cortex, I,
I can no longer remember whether the most relevant
subarea, let's say, or subregion is the ventral medial
or the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. That's something that I
read, uh, many years, that I read about many
years ago, but, uh, I mean, what would you
say are some of the most robust findings when
it comes to that?
There are 4 key areas. So you've got the
amygdala, which is, I'm going to use perhaps outdated
terms, but, you know, connect with with the viewers,
right? So you're the lowermost like primitive reptile part
of our brain, right? The amygdala is what lights
up when we have fear. And the amygdala is
larger and more active in the brains of conservatives,
particularly people on the far right. In fact, if
you removed all the far right people, um, like
the center right kind of normie conservatives, um, you
have them in other countries. In America, we don't
really have these people anymore, or they're Democrats actually,
I should say, but, um, if you remove the
far right, like the center-right conservatives wouldn't look that
much different. It's, it's these right-wing authoritarians that have
like gigantic amygdala energy. Um, AND yes, the studies
do show that a larger and more active amygdala
does mean you are experiencing more fear. The amygdala
is also, um, one of the players in disgust.
So disgust is very important for our survival, you
know, you think about when we're hunter-gatherers, it's probably
good to know not to eat the rotting carcass.
It's probably a pretty good idea, you know what
I'm saying? But it can be overactive, and the
studies unfortunately show that. Uh, UNSURPRISINGLY, a big factor
in anti-gay bigotry and anti-trans bigotry is an oversensitivity
to disgust.
So, uh, just to be clear, the amygdala processes
disgust and fear. Yes,
the fear is the main one you really wanna
think about. Um, YEAH, what's interesting is that a
racist, like their amygdala lights up when they see
a, a black person's face. Like it's that and
and it's, it is so instant. It's, it's, it's
very much instinct and reaction and one of the
fascinating things about political psychology is I really get
why conservatives are called reactionaries. And hopefully by the
end of this, you'll really get, they're really reactionary,
you know what I'm saying? Whoever came up with
that, uh, galaxy brain IQ, um, shall we move
on to the next, the next two sections? So,
um, so now we move to, to the more
like, I'm just gonna call it the middle brains,
right? It's not the most advanced thinking structure, we'll
get there. But you've got the insular cortex. Insular
cortex, there's a study done, really, really interesting study
where They looked at activity in the insular cortex
and the amygdala, and it predicted your political views
83% with 83% accuracy. In political science for decades,
the number one predictor of your political views are
what are mommy and daddy's political views. Like 2/3
of the time you adopt the political views of
your parents. The uh brain activity study, 83% predictive.
I mean 83% is huge in social science. Yeah,
yeah, yeah, it's like, whoa, dude. So, um, insular
cortex, um, what does it do? So the functions
of the insular cortex include compassion, empathy. Yeah, I'm
pausing for dramatic effect. Uh, TASTE, perception, uh, motor
control, self-awareness, and I don't just mean emotional self-awareness,
I also mean awareness of your own body state
and your own body cues. So, for example, I'm
reacting in a fearful way. Um, uh, AND if
I have a very active and well developed interior
cortex, one can, uh, reasonably assume that I will
therefore be better at, at being aware, oh, I'm
having a fear response, I'm having an anxiety response,
and then being able to process it a little
bit better, at least ideally. Um, THE insular cortex
also deals with cognitive functioning, interpersonal experience, and awareness
of homeostatic emotions such as hunger, pain, and fatigue.
Um, IT, it, there's also, so conservatives have been
found to be, uh, more intolerant of uncertainty, and
that is related to insular cort, uh, insular cortex
function, and this region is also vital for theory
of mind. Do, do people know what theory of
mind is? It's like the ability to like,
I, I mean, I mean, on my show we've
explored that topic lots of times, but yeah, go,
go ahead, go ahead. Give us a summary.
It's like, uh, it's like empathy. Squared. It's like
the, the ability to like, really understand a different
person's like perspective, thoughts, goals, feelings, desires, intentions. Yeah,
it's really getting a different person, and one of
the things that fascinates me is how often conservatives
project the way that they think and feel onto
other people, and I think it's because literally, Uh,
11 thing is that conservatives typically grow up and
live in more insular environments. Um, I shouldn't use
the word insular because we're talking about the insular
cortex. Oh, well, so, um, they live in more
insular environments of only people like them, so they,
they, they simply just don't experience as many different
perspectives as people on the left. This is part
of the reason why rural people are more conservative.
Because they just don't come across as many people
that are different and social contact with different kinds
of people, trans people, gay people, uh, immigrants, uh,
anyone with a different skin tone. Oh my God,
uh, women, feminists, atheists, you know, coming in contact
with these groups of people is a powerful antidote
to prejudice, racism, bigotry of all kinds. Um. So
that's part of the reason why I think conservatives
project uh more frequently, we all do it, but
they project more frequently, you know, they, they seem
to think that, oh, you liberals, this is a
huge talking point in the United States, liberals just
want control. They just, that that that's what they
want universal healthcare for. They just want to control
your healthcare. It's like, dude, you're so projecting here,
bro. And part of it is because they, they,
they have a reduced theory of mind. Um, AND
reduced empathy and, and so they're, they just on
on average, do not understand how a different person
functions differently, right? Cause it's easy to assume, oh,
well, they think the equal and opposite, right? Conservatives
might think I'm on team white people or team
men, therefore, those, those progressives are on team, you
know, brown people and trans people, right? But it's,
it's actually a completely different way of thinking where
people on the right think in terms of teams
and people on the left don't think in terms
of teams. So, that's the insular cortex. You wanna
move on?
Yeah, I mean, I was just going to ask
you, uh, and please correct me if I'm wrong,
but isn't it the case that also one big
psychological difference between, or I guess that we can
say it's two different psychological differences, but between conservatives
and progressives is that conservatives have much more of
a black and white. Kind of thinking and they
have more difficulty processing ambiguity. So for example, when
it comes to when it comes to social markers,
like for example, oh we're if we're talking about
gender, oh there's men and there's women, oh trans
women, no, no, no, we can't have that. That's
too ambiguous for me. It has to be delineated.
Between, there can't be any ambiguity there. It has
to be delineated between uh you're either a man
or you're a woman. There's no, I, I don't
want to hear about that. I mean women with
uh dicks and men with vagina. I mean, I
don't want to hear about any of that. I,
I mean, isn't that also part of uh the
conservative way of thinking?
100%, yes, um, and you can also see the
connection between intolerance for ambiguity and being attracted to
religion, which provides you answers. Even though they don't
have much evidence, but, you know, stories, man, people,
people love stories, um, and you're absolutely right. I
don't even think I need to add anything, nailed
it.
Yeah, so, so, and do you think when it
comes to how they deal or react to trans
people, do you think that that's the main psychological
mechanism playing out, or that there are other Other
aspects of it, like, for example, uh, when it
comes to the amygdala being activated, do they also
feel more, for example, disgust or fear toward, uh,
queer people even in general.
So, uh, also there's 3 elements here we're, we're
going on. So there's, there's the intolerance for ambiguity
and that's absolutely, actually, I've just thought of 1/4.
So it's the intolerance of ambiguity part, right? Uh,
JUST, just not liking. I have to think about,
I just want things to be easy because on
average, frankly, conservatives are more mentally lazy. Uh, PREJUDICE,
uh, is a more mentally lazy way of thinking,
and, uh, so is hierarchy and wanting things to
be more black and white as opposed to more
nuanced is part of lazy-mindedness. So there's this intolerance
of ambiguity is one. Fear of change is another
thing, um, just, just cognitive rigidity, not wanting to
change your mind. Things are the way that, that,
that I've been told, and I don't wanna change.
That's, that's element number 2. Element number 3 is,
uh, disgust. Now, A lot of people have been
trained by religion, for example, or their media to
react emotionally in certain ways. It's not reasonable to
see some, you know, family of brown people coming
from Mexico and to be afraid of that. Like,
there's just no reason, but they've been trained to
react with fear, and that's the way that a
lot of people have been trained to react to
trans people and gay people, to react with disgust.
However, there is a caveat which is. There's a
lot of conservatives that are actually uh gay or
bi or into translating and uh
we can we can, we can see, we can
see that through Pornhub data and stuff like that.
Yeah, don't look up I think it's lawsuit.org map
of uh trans uh adult searches. Don't, don't look
that up. You won't want to look up the
map of the United States and you definitely won't
want to look at what states voted most heavily
for Donald Trump. You don't want to look at,
you don't want to look at the list of
cities where the top ones are all in red
states. You don't want to look at that. You
keep that hidden. And then there was a 4th
1, but I forgot what it was.
0000, OK, so, uh, OK, so, um, um, I
will give you some time to try to recall
it, but I mean, is cognitive rigidity something that
correlates with cognitive ability? I mean, is it that
people who score, for example, lower on IQ, uh,
also tend to be more cognitively rigid?
I, I'll tell you this, the, the open-mindedness, which
is obviously very similar to cognitive rigidity, uh, or
I guess the opposite, right, um, open-mindedness continually is,
uh, correlates with, with higher intelligence. So yeah, and
what we also see is that conservatives score higher
in cognitive rigidity and lower in cognitive abilities on
average, particularly people who are socially conservative, people who
are more prejudiced, people who are more, uh, you
know. White supremacists, sexists, what have you, those are
the people especially that, that rate low in, uh,
in, in intelligence measures and, and emotional intelligence measures
as well, which I suppose could be the, the
fourth element of, of transphobia is just a complete
lack of emotional intelligence. Um, IT'S also incredibly selfish.
You, you really think about. You know, these transphobes,
they want to take away people's rights and people's
healthcare and people's freedom of expression because They're so
easily triggered. That they value. Not having an emotional
reaction that they should be able to control over
the rights and health care of other people. It's,
it's a level of selfishness that's really Baffling to
me.
You, you know, it's funny because the conservatives and
right wingers and particularly in the US are always
or spent years, even a full decade or more,
talking about how people on the left and they
use terms, they used to have a term like
social justice warriors, now it's the wokes. Oh my
God, such snowflakes, they get triggered triggered by everything.
But you get triggered
by all this injustice and people being hurt. Meanwhile,
a trans person exists.
No, yeah, yeah, that's what I was going to
say because a while ago on Facebook, um, I
tried to come up with a complete list of
things that triggers right wingers, and I stopped at
100 and I could have continued, so. You know,
so doesn't surprise me, man. So doesn't surprise me.
And, and, and what's the word we're looking for?
Projection.
Yeah, yeah, it's like that expression, every accusation is
a confession, right, or something like that.
Especially relevant for people on the right, particularly the
far right.
Yeah, so, I mean, what do you make of,
did you
want to go to the other, the other differences?
Oh,
oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, sure, sure.
So again, uh, we're, we're, we're still in the,
in the more middle mammalian kind of brain. I'm
sorry to use if, if there's a neuroscience person
that's pulling their hair out going, oh my God,
we haven't used these terms since whatever time period,
just people connect with with these words, all right?
Um, SO there's the anterior cingulate cortex, which, uh,
has repeatedly been found to be, um, larger and
more active in the brains of people on the
left. PLAYS a wide role uh of autonomic functions.
We're talking regulating blood pressure, we're talking about regulating
heart rate, we're talking about rational cognitive functions such
as reward anticipation, decision making, empathy and emotion. And
here's something that really interested me. This what I
did was I looked up a political science or
excuse me, a political psychology paper on this. And
then I looked up a neurology paper to to
really grasp more about what the anterior cingulate cortex
is all about, and I found this fascinating, OK?
You'll feel, uh, think about conservative men as I
say this. Avoidance of painful emotions is often the
motivating force in negative behaviors, such as substance abuse,
binge eating, and suicide. These actions are taken as
part of a maladaptive approach to control, avoid, or
regulate painful emotions. And suppressing emotions caused more activity
in the amygdala. The ACC is also relevant for
emotional intelligence and theory of mind.
Uh, IN what ways?
Um, IT just plays a role in theory of
mind and, and emotional intelligence. There, you know, one,
our brain is not segmented in a way where
it's like this part does the one thing, you
know, there are multiple parts that deal with theory
of mind. So the prefrontal cortex, which is right
here, this is the most, this is, this is
the advanced part right here. This is what makes
humans so special, all right? That this is what
makes the human brain the most complex thing in
the universe. To our knowledge. Um, THE prefrontal cortex
is, uh, did I emphasize it's the most advanced
thinking structure in the brain? Did I do that
enough? Um, IT, it is also, uh, larger and
more active in the brains of progressives, and one
consequence of this is, I remember I made a
video on this where People on the OK, there's
an experiment, right? And Two groups of people. Uh,
ONE, so somebody from 222 people from two different
groups of people, they do the same bad thing,
OK? They, they, they do the same crime. People
on the right. WILL be more punishing towards the
person that's not in their group. Then they will
be to the person who is in their group
for the same offense. And the further left you
go, the more egalitarian the response is, and prefrontal
cortex activity was the main correlate in this. So
the, so the, so the more your prefrontal cortex
activity, the less biased you were towards your own
group and against the other group. And this is
not just Democrats, Republicans. Socialists, conservatives, this is like,
you root for a different sports team than we
do, right? You root for Milan and I root
for uh for for uh uh uh Juventus, you
know, whatever it is. Yeah. That's the only thing
I know about Italian soccer, so forgive me if
I just messed that up.
Yeah, I, I mean, maybe Italian people will get
offended. I mean, I mean, even I feel a
tiny bit offended because I follow the Italian the
Italian league, but anyway.
Oh, listen, I feel it towards San Francisco Giants
fans, OK, as a baseball fan who does not
root for, I, I totally punish them more, all
right, for the same offense.
Yeah, yeah, so look, I wanted to ask you,
what do you make of average differences between men
and women when it comes to their political preferences?
Is it really that women tend to be on
average more progressive than men? And if so, uh,
where does that come from? I mean, is it
really more about, uh, nature or nurture, er, and
What, how do you, what do you make of,
uh, data, I think I read about this data
back in like two years ago, 2024 or something,
uh, about how political scientists have been noticing that
over in recent years in countries like the US,
Germany, South Korea, other European countries, uh, there seems
to, there seems to be a tendency where Women
are moving farther to the left. Younger women particularly,
and young men are moving farther to the right.
I mean, do you know, I know that these
are several different questions, but do you know what
might explain this phenomenon?
Yes, so. Um, ARE women naturally more progressive? It's
very easy to fall into the, to the, I
guess, evolutionary psychology thinking of like, well, women carry
the babies in their bodies, so therefore, they're going
to be more connected to other people, and the
men killed the animals, so they need to have
less empathy, and by carrying the baby in your
body, you will have more compassion. Like, it's very
easy to fall into that kind of thinking, um,
but of course, uh, back in hunter-gatherer times, like,
We didn't have the nuclear family, so it was
like, yeah, as we see in society today, right,
like teachers, uh, daycare workers, like they do a
disproportionate amount of the childcare, um, and I'm sure
that, um, and I'm, I have no doubt that
it was like that during hunter-gatherer times cause it
was like that, you know, during medieval times and
so on. That's, that's its own thing. So the,
so the point is, it's easy to fall in
that thinking, but I don't think that's the right
way of thinking about it. Women are becoming more
feminist, especially, and becoming more left, um, younger women,
that is. And, uh, I don't agree with young
men are becoming more right. What we're seeing with
young men is men are becoming more and more
pushed to the extremes than like any other group,
like young men in particular, right? Like, there are
more young men in the United States who are
progressive Bernie voters than there were old men. There
are also uh uh uh way fewer like centrists,
center right, center left young men. There are if
you're on the right and you're a man, and
you're under the age of like 30 or 35,
you're probably an extreme right winger. Then the level
of like, Holocaust denialism amongst Republicans under the age
of 30 is staggering. It's, it's, I I I
can't remember the statistic. I know it was a
majority. I think it was over 60%, but I,
I don't think it was over like 80%, but
it was a lot are Holocaust deniers. So, and,
and a lot of that is the algorithm, a
lot of that is, is sexual frustration. Um, IT'S
not a sexual frustration is a huge thing that
pushes men to the right. One of Hitler's greatest
groups of support was sexually frustrated young men. Yeah.
So, why is this happening? Well, beyond things like
the algorithm. And sexual frustration. For men, there's also
this. What do I do now? Like, now I'm
not just the provider. Society used to tell me
that if I had a job and I provided
for my family, that's what it is to be
a man. I think there's a lot of men
that don't know what being a man is anymore,
and they're being You know, reasonably, it's like, hey,
how about some emotional intelligence? How about some emotional
support, like, take on more of the roles that
women had the entire burden of for so long.
But also, society and our culture and parents don't
treat and train boys to be like that. Um,
THERE'S an interesting thing called precarious manhood theory that
I'm, I've really been reading a lot on recently,
and it's the idea that manhood is, is hard
to win and easy to lose, and it's something
that's social, it's not biological, it's not simply a
puberty or body thing. It's also, uh, it's, it's
a very social thing in a way that womanhood
is, is seen by culture, not by me, but
by culture as being more biological. Oh, when And
let's, let's get real, like, a lot of cultures
are horribly patriarchal and see womanhood as like, through
the male gaze and through like, can you, can
you reproduce? Um, BUT, but manhood is something that
must constantly be demonstrated publicly. This is why men
have to freaking posture so much, they're so annoying
about it. Um, SO I think a lot of
it is just, you know, the parents of the
older generation just haven't trained their boys. To a
lot of them. My mom trained me just fine.
She parented me just fine to have, you know,
emotional intelligence, but a lot of these parents just
don't. Instill into into young boys that that they
need to be uh more than just stoic, unemotional
people who are punished for being feminine. As for
why women are young women are so um so
much more, more feminist and more left, uh, I
mean, part of it is just the internet gives
you access to so much more information, and if
unless you are in the right wing hate algorithm.
You could just look up like whatever information you
want. Oh, does, does the minimum wage actually increase
unemployment as Fox News keeps saying, as CNN keeps
saying as well. Uh, OH, you can just look
it up. Oh, no, actually, no. Right? And, and
young people are just, our instinct is, well, I'll
just look it up, at least a lot of
us, a lot more than the older generations. I
don't wanna be black and white here, I wanna
be nuanced. Um, PART of it is the younger
women are, uh, the most educated group of people
in the history of humanity and education. As much
as I'd love to tell you that it's just
knowing more about how the world works, uh, really
the number one reason why a college education makes
you, um, Among, uh, you know, more progressive, yes,
but less right-wing authoritarian, less fascist, less like right-wing
conservative, is simply because you're coming into contact with
all sorts of different kinds of people and women
have been just beating men in the college education
game, at least in the United States for over
a decade now. Um, AND the, and I think
the number one reason is because women are socialized
to be more emotionally intelligent. As much as they're,
I, I've done multiple videos. Talking about how there
are dozens of studies that show that cognitive abilities,
AKA intelligence. Are negatively correlate with right wing and
prejudiced views. Yes, intelligence, cognitive abilities, the ability to
reason, these are very important when it comes to
politics, but actually I think the data is beginning
to show more and more that it's actually emotional
intelligence that is the most important intelligence for your
political views, for informing your political views, and, and
yes, it's empathy, yes, it's compassion, but it's also
self-awareness. It's also being able to recognize. Wow, I'm
actually being manipulated by Fox News into fearing something
that I don't need to fear. It's recognizing that
you are afraid. It's recognizing that you do have
anxiety, and it's recognizing the sources of it. And
it's, it's, so it's not just understanding other people,
but a lot of it is understanding yourself. Why
do I actually feel what I feel? Am I
feeling shame and afraid for the future? Because, uh,
my, my, my dad's job was shipped overseas, and
I live in a town where there are very
few opportunities, and, uh, the education that I would
need to have a middle class life is gonna
put me tens of thousands or maybe $100,000 or
$200,000 in debt, um, and, and I feel like
I have no power, and there's the, the shame
of all that. Or is it because those immigrants
are coming across the border? And emotional intelligence is
what will tell you, uh, the correct answer out
of those two. So, it's really, uh, it's not
a natural thing, it's that women are socialized from
such a young age. To pay more attention to
other people, to, to recognize their other people's emotions
more, and to care more. Men are, a lot
of boys are, are punished on an emotional level,
and I'm not just talking about, you know, they're
not smacked necessarily, but they're punished on an emotional
level. They're made to feel less than, they're, they're
made to feel emasculated for showing that they care,
because that's feminine, bro, that's gay. And so it
trains it out of men.
OK, so I, I mean, let me be a
little bit provocative here, and I, I, if I
say something that, yeah, if I say something you
don't agree with, please let me know, and I
definitely someday have to try to find an economist,
particularly who, I mean, there, there has to be
someone out there working on this topic for sure.
It's just that I haven't come across them yet,
but I mean, when I think about, because you
were mentioning, for example, uh, traditional gender roles and
the sort of heavy cultural legacy that we have
of traditional gender roles and how, how that affects
them, than young men in terms of, uh, them
in our current economic and political circumstances, not being
able to being the sole providers in a household
or something like that. Uh, I mean, I, I
think that we should also, there's also a very
heavy, a very big economic element here to consider
because when it comes to, for example, the rise
of the manosphere. I mean, for me, at least,
it's not a coincidence at all, uh, the timing
where uh the the manosphere became a thing because
we had the 2008, 2009 economic crisis and then
Suddenly, I mean, the labor market was in turmoil
and many people who, I mean some of them
who got their college degrees, some of them who
didn't get their college degrees suddenly had much worse.
Professional prospects out there, and I mean that affected
both men and women and of course women have
dealt with it a little bit better than men
because they are outperforming men in terms of academic
achievements and all of that. I mean, we could
also talk a little bit about that, but focusing
on the economics, I think it's Pretty obvious that
in an economic context where people start lacking those
opportunities where just previously they had them, their parents
had them, maybe even their grandparents had them, I
mean they wouldn't even have to attend college or
university to have, uh, I mean, fairly. A good
job in terms of the payment
and a union manufacturing job with high school.
Yeah, sure, and you would be able to support
your entire family in the 50s, 60s, even, I
mean, early 70s and so on. And I mean
that happened and then A little bit afterwards it
was when you saw the rise of all of
these manosphere figures. I mean, starting with the pickup
artists and then the red pill, the black pill,
the incels, the muktau, and all of that, and
I, and I think it is not a coincidence
at all. I mean, it's basically some people, some
opportunists, maybe. Some of them sociopaths even who took
advantage of there being a huge swath of men
with no or very little future prospects to then
make them buy into these misogynist women hating narrative
and blaming everything. On left wingers, feminists, and so
on. And I mean, I, I, one of the
reasons why I think that the economics here is
very important is because something like that also happened
in Japan in the late 80s, early 90s where
basically up until their economic crisis. Everyone who went
to college to attend or to attend any or
to take any any kind of degree, basically, they
would have immediate access once they finished university to
a stable job in public companies, state owned companies
that would be basically for life and they would
be able to. Basically support their families, get married,
have children and all of that. And it was
in the late 80s, early 90s that actually what
now is still a phenomenon, there was a break
or a break in terms of marriage rates, in
terms of people becoming more and more sexless in
The fertility rates started to drop. So I mean,
what do you think about all of that? I
think that the economics here matters a lot when
it comes to explaining these, uh, let's say, intergender
phenomena, I
guess. Yes, we need to talk about power, we
need to talk about shame, uh, but first, there
was a wonderful quote that I think about weekly.
Which is those who fear for their future look
to the past. People who fear for their future,
look to the past, love that quote, makes them
more conservative. Uh, FEAR of a dangerous world also
makes you more right wing. But, so when you
talk about powerlessness, right? So if you are Uh,
you know, you, you can't get the education you
need necessarily, right, in order to have a middle-class
job, um, uh, because of student debt or, or
you just didn't, you're just not good at school.
Some people just aren't very good at school, right?
And it's so much of, of economics is power,
right? You have the power to own a home,
you have the power to buy a car, you
have the power to go on a vacation. These
are all freedoms, I suppose, as well, but When
you feel powerless in the economy. When you feel
less freedom in the economy. Some people are going
to try to compensate. By trying to have power
over other people. So, hey, listen, you don't have
that good paying job. Well, you know, back in
the back in, you know, decades ago, at least
you would have had power over a woman. I
think a lot of it is that. I think
a lot of it is, and, and of course
there's a white supremacist um angle to this as
well. The feeling of powerlessness is very, very common
with populists on both the left and the right,
just as shame is very, very common. The shame
of, oh, I'm not gonna have as good of
a life as my parents, and because we live
in a capitalist culture, especially here in America, where
You know, if you don't have a middle class
life, it's cause you suck and you didn't deserve
it, and you didn't work hard enough and you
weren't good enough, and you have a character flaw,
and you suck as a person, uh, you know,
lie down and rot, um. And people on the
right, because they don't process negative emotions as well
as frequently, particularly men. Remember, if you're a man
on the right, you are not processing your emotions,
you are not processing your pain, you are stuffing
it away, you're suppressing, you're bottling it up, and
so the shame and powerlessness that you feel. Mhm.
It's gonna come out in some very bad ways,
right? Whereas people on the left use it as
a unifying force. Uh, BY acknowledging. These emotions To
create a community that will fight against the powerful,
whereas people on the right internalize it, it hurts
them, and then they lash out in the form
of prejudice. Um, AND this is a, this is
a huge source not only of, of anti-feminism but
also anti-immigrant views. Not having power over women, I
think that's huge. People, young men today, they look
at the past and they, and they think, well,
you know, I might not have a good job,
but at least I could have had power over
a woman. And you combine that with sexual frustration
and They're stewing in a really bad soup.
So I mean, I, I want to ask you
this, uh, uh, I mean when I first invited
you to, to do this interview, it was back
in November or December if I remember correctly,
it was back in 2017 as well, wasn't it?
It was a while ago.
Yeah, I mean, but it was definitely before the
Epstein files got released, or at least part of
the Epstein files got released, and I mean I
wanted to ask you about that because I find
it really fascinating how for many, many, many, many
years. We've listened to right-wing people, particularly people who
are also into conspiracy theories, always coming up with
these wild conspiracy theories about how there was supposed.
A cabal of rich people, of billionaires and international
cabal of people doing this or that. I mean,
putting 5G chips in vaccines and all of that
kind of thing. I mean Pizza gate and all
of that, and then, and then suddenly, you, you
actually have evidence of such a cabal of. Uh,
PDF files, right, and, and, and they decide that,
oh no, no, no, I'm going to defend Trump
and defend all these people. I mean, what explains
that kind of behavior?
There are a few things that immediately come to
mind. So the first one is that They've built
up so many walls of like, they're just out
to attack Trump. It's so much easier for these
right-wing authoritarians to deny reality. For them on an
ego level than it is to accept that they
were wrong, to accept that they were conned, to
accept that they were tricked. I think their ego
is just too fragile to take it. Unfortunately, this
is the history of these far right people, OK.
Far right people were still on the Iraq has
weapons of mass destruction and that's why George W.
Bush invaded them. They were on that train for
years after it was proved it was debunked. Same
with, you know, Nixon did nothing wrong. Um, THESE
people just find it easier to deny facts. And
to cling on to their story, I really believe
strongly that a lot of humans prefer stories over
science, narrative over facts, and they have a narrative,
and it's easier to stick with that narrative. I
think there's also a bit of a sunk cost
fallacy, you know, they've already put so much of
their identity into Trump, they can't back down now,
and there's also this. I suppose a bit of
an inferiority complex, if you really listen to, and
I don't know if this is true internationally, but
certainly here in the United States. There's a lot
of like conservatives feeling inferior, conservatives feeling inferior on
a moral level because they know deep down that
people on the left care more, and let's get
real, we all know deep down that caring more
about other people makes you a better person. Um,
SO I think there's a bit of a moral
inferiority complex and conservatives complain all the time about
being condescended to. And so by these damn liberals,
and so I think they just can't take the
idea that those damn liberals were correct, and I,
I just, I just don't think they can handle
that on an emotional level. Um, THE other thing
is, I don't think conservatives actually care. About child
abuse. In the United States, conservatives don't. I think
a lot of them just don't, um. You know,
that's the kind of hierarchy, they, they like having
power over their kids. Just think about how much
they advocate for children not having freedom, whether that's
Trans kids not having freedom over their own healthcare
decisions, um, you know, contraception, um, even not having
debt for school lunches. Can you believe how backwards
of a society we are that the, that the
Republican Party votes repeatedly. To keep debt for school
lunches, it's like, it's so appalling. I think that
when they were complaining about, oh, the Democrats are
part of this cabal of child abusers, I think
it's really just a justification for their real belief,
which is Democrats bad, their side bad, I don't
like them. Here's my excuse, here's my justification, here's
my reasoning, and Uh, I think that a lot
of conservative hypocrisy. Is in their talking points, but
not their actual beliefs. They never say their actual
beliefs because their actual beliefs are horrible, and a
lot of them are frankly self-blind to what they
actually believe, you know, uh it's it's easier to
believe on an ego level. That you're anti-abortion because
you're such a noble defender of child of of
of the unborn of children. Uh, MEANWHILE, you're also
voting to, uh, defund children's healthcare, uh, to defund
food stamps which disproportionately go to families and with
children and children themselves. And of course there's the
school lunches that I mentioned, you know, like there's
so many examples, like, it's, I,
I, I mean just the other day I saw
a meme, it was very funny, it was like
a picture of a newborn. And the text was
like, this is the precise stage of development where
pro-lifers no longer care about your well-being.
Yep, yep. And so, we know, we see the
hypocrisy in them not actually being pro-life, but it's
because their actual position. It is a lot deeper
and it's, it's submission to their authorities. It's in-group
loyalty and it's uh purity slash sanctity and, and
really all of their beliefs go back to that.
And so if you, if you, if you look
at what they actually believe, there's actually not a
lot of hypocrisy, because that's what we're getting on,
right, is, is how could they be such hypocrites,
um. So yeah, I, I think it's, I think
it's that.
Yeah, and it's also because we talked earlier about
trans people, it's also a very funny. I mean,
uh, I'm, I'm being sort of sarcastic here, right?
But it's, it's very funny how Uh, they spent,
and, and they're still, uh, I mean that's still
an ongoing narrative that they're still saying that or
accusing queer people. I mean, nowadays it's mostly trans
people, but it used to be also gay people,
for example, of being child groomers, but then you
have actual. Evidence of people from your side of
the political spectrum being child groomers and suddenly you
don't care about that and prefer to stick to
your BS narrative about a queer and LGBTQ plus
people being child groomers.
But you notice like, I'm not sure, and, and
I don't know how unique this is to America,
but a lot of American conservatives don't have like
true beliefs. Like, a lot of it is just
excuses. It's they don't like gay and trans people,
and, and somebody gave them an excuse, they gave
them a talking point to latch onto, and they
did it because that's a lot easier than just
saying, well, I don't like them cause they're gay,
because in America there's this weird thing where like,
we all know that if you're a bigot, you're
a worse person. So, we don't, so like a
lot of bigots don't want to admit that they're
bigots, mostly to themselves. They don't wanna see themselves,
people don't wanna see themselves as bad people, they
wanna see themselves as good people. And so, if
you can latch onto an excuse that justifies the
feelings you already had. A lot of people are
gonna take that convenient excuse.
Yeah, it's like when they make, for example, a
racist remark and someone points the finger at them
and says, You're a racist, and then they, they're
like, Oh my God, you called me a racist.
I'm so offended. Yeah, what about the black person
you attacked earlier? I mean, Which one is, is
worse, is like, uh, people being victims of racism
or you being called a racist when you're actually
a racist?
Cause they're reactionary and they're just thinking about their
own selfish emotional reaction. But this also gets back
to like, do they actually believe in anything? Like,
they, they seem to think a lot of like,
Oh, you're a racist, like, oh, they're just name
calling. But they said that really seems to be
their reaction. I actually see this behavior in narcissists,
like when you call them out on their shit.
They seem to just think it's just name-calling meant
to insult them, and they don't understand, like, no,
this is a reflection of This part of your
character and this part of your character is bad.
Um, AND then this comes to emotional intelligence, because
being able to process these kinds of negative feelings
and to be able to reasonably respond to them
and to grow from them are all part of
emotional intelligence, and again, emotional intelligence is a top
predictor of your political views.
Yeah, so, uh, I mean we have around 10
more minutes, so let me just ask you about
one last topic then. I mean, there's. Uh, ALSO
this sort of conspiracy theory going around. I mean,
uh, mostly in the US, but unfortunately there are
also people here who perhaps, um, tune in too
much into, uh, conservative podcasts, Americans, American conservative podcasts,
and then the
Portuguese people are copying our American stupidity.
Uh YES, yes, we're
export this so it's one of our biggest exports
is dumb. And,
yeah, but, yeah, but unfortunately that's definitely the case,
even when it doesn't apply at all to our
socio-cultural context. But anyway, uh I mean there's this
sort of narrative conspiracy theory that we've been hearing
a lot in recent years about how, oh my
God, universal. Universities, academia has been taken over by
the wokes, by left-wing radicals, by the radical left,
and I mean just recently I released an interview
with Michael Mann, one of the authors of Science
Under Siege, because he talks about what are the
actual threats, real threats to science, like, uh, for
example, the plutocrats and right wingers. Um, I mean,
removing, uh, university, um, I, I mean lowering investment
in universities and all of that, uh, and then
I, I said, so look, there's this, uh, I
guess alternative theory coming from the right about the
walks and all of that, and he told me
about how that's just complete nonsense, but I mean,
if there's More, uh, liberals or progressives in university,
uh, yes, why is that the case then?
So there, there's like I have so much to
say on this. OK, so, so first off, conservatives
just aren't as interested in studying people. They're just
not as interested in people. You can see it
in their political views. I just don't think this
is particularly. Controversial.
I mean, I mean they're not even, they're not
even that interested in intellectual stuff or at least
not as, not at the level of progressives, I
mean, because um, I, I was, I, I mean,
go ahead, I, I have an idea in mind,
but suddenly it slipped my mind, so maybe I
will remember it later.
Well, thank God you got somebody else on here
to take up the space of talking, you know.
Um, SO, so conservatives are, are, in the words
of George Carlin, my, one of my most influential
people ever, uh, conservatives are interested in stuff, in
property, in owning things, and people on the left
are interested in people. And I think that that
comes through in what we study. If you're in
academia, you had to make it beyond just the
undergraduate level, you had to really know your shit.
And if you're going through that point, you're probably
not a right winger. If you're willing to go
that far in education on the right, you're more
likely to go into business, for example, or, or
something more applied. Um, SO, that's one thing. The
second thing is, isn't it so illogical? It's like,
OK, so the people that study this stuff for
a living, the people that do the research, the
people that know more about a topic. THAN anyone
else that if all of these experts Generally speaking,
agree on a cluster of ideas and conclusions. They're
probably right. If you had 5 doctors, OK, and
they all came back with the same diagnosis, you
dumb conservative, you would believe them. Right? If you
had 5 plumbers coming to your house and going,
oh yeah, this is the problem with your pipes,
you would believe them, but because they start from
like the, the, the fragile ego position of, I
can't handle being wrong, they have to do these
mental gymnastics, there's some conspiracy. OK. If there's a
conspiracy that and all these studies are just made
up, then why is it that these right-wing think
tanks don't glob onto anyone who is um conservative,
who otherwise would be in academia, but, you know,
they're kept out by this conspiracy. Why don't they
just get those people and why don't they just
make up a ton of their own studies? Yep.
Why don't they debunk all of the all of
the progressive studies? OK, they can't because that's where
the facts are. This is like denying like, oh
yeah, all those mathematicians, Ricardo, do you know that
all these math liberal mathematicians, they all think 2
+ 2 equals 4. Can you believe that fucking
woke, you know, it's like it's so, it's so
a lot, it's so, it's so Dunning Kruger effect,
it's so overestimating your own abilities when you're incompetent
and short, um, and of course another reason, and,
and I'll just go right back to it, which
is another reason why academia is more left leaning
is because when you come into contact with different
groups of people from different countries, different, uh, ethnicities,
races, genders. Backgrounds, religions, whatever, countries of origin, you're
less likely to be bigoted, and bigotry is foundational
to right-wing thinking, and I, and I, and I
know. That not everyone on the right is necessarily
racist or sexist, or homophobic or transphobic. Um, BUT
you know what the kind of bigotry you're missing?
Is anti-poor bigotry. This is a bigotry that gets
no discussion whatsoever, but if you are a conservative,
You are a bigot towards at least one of
those groups, poor people, women. Different races or or
ethnicities or or LGBT people. You, you are a
bigot in one of those respects. And, and being
around different kinds of people just totally reduces your
bigotry. This is called social contact theory. It is
one of the most studied things, maybe the most
studied thing in social psychology, of which political psychology
is like one branch of social psychology.
No, I remember that what I was going to
say. I mean, I find it very funny how
there's these, and this, it's just a select group
of people who like to expose their grievances online
and in public spaces. I mean this sort of
Um, underperforming academics who have these sort of racist,
misogynist, transphobic ideas, and then they decide to band
together and go on podcasts and on social media
and even writing entire books about how, oh my
God, they were the victims of the woke mob,
they were the victims. They were oppressed by the
progressives, by the liberals, by the radical left, by
the wokes when they were in academia and they
had to leave or they were fired because they
couldn't just express their high level ideas or they
couldn't just publish their BS in peer reviewed papers
because no one took it seriously and then Oh,
and then there are also these college dropouts who
attended college, and then, oh my God, they were
exposed to. Ideas that were different from the ones
they got, they got from their parents, from their
conservative communities. Oh my God, the drama, the horror,
what's happening here?
The. The, the, the outrage from that Oklahoma student
who got the F on the paper, and it's
like if you actually read it, it's like horribly
written, it's like,
I mean, I mean, yeah, I was going to
say that there are probably uh children in elementary
school that would have written a a more coherent
papers, you know, that was just complete uh crap,
to be honest. Yeah, but, but, but I mean,
but I mean there's this, it, it's just that
what I see is that many of those people,
first of all, are not willing to be open
to new ideas. Second of all, second of all,
they accuse. Wokes, radical leftists, liberals, whatever they call
them, of not being willing to discuss certain ideas,
but it's them who are not willing to discuss
ideas different from their own ideas. And then when
it comes to particularly Um, former academics who have
now gone a grievance trip, let's say on social
media podcasts and so on, uh,
it's Jordan Peterson syndrome,
yeah, it's because. I mean, if you look at
even the, even their own version of the story.
It's, it's pretty obvious that it was them who
were, were on the wrong because they were just
bad academics and they're just bad at their job.
I mean, I mean they were unprofessional, so why
shouldn't they have been fired even more so when
some of them. Were admonished by their own, uh,
I, I, I don't know, their own administrators or
someone like that about how they were constantly going
on social media and making racist, misogynist, transphobic posts,
and then they just decided to go on with
it. I mean, come on,
the right is all about personal responsibility.
I, I mean, I mean, look, we, I,
we end it right there.
Uh, NO, I mean, I guess that's a great
point went on also because I, I'm looking at
the time and I know that you have to
go, so maybe someday we, we can, uh, do
a follow up to this because I could go
on for another 3 hours, I guess. But, but,
but look, I'm going to, as I said at
the beginning, I'm going to leave, uh, a link,
links to your TikTok. I'm going to add you
as a collaborator on YouTube and all of that,
so. Uh, I mean, people that are watching or,
or that will be watching or listening to us,
please go and check Keegan's, uh, YouTube channel and
TikTok because they are really great and thank you
so much for doing this,
man. Hey, thanks for having me on, Ricardo. I
hope you have a good rest of your evening
over on the other side of the world. By
the way, can I ask where, where, where in
Portugal do you live? You know what, we'll do
this after this. We'll, we'll have a little chat
after the recording stops.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgius Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Jr. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.